Once around, asteroid
Apopus at one stage believed to be one
of the greatest threats in terms of
asteroid impact of a fairly significant
body on the earth. So these are
asteroids, small space rocks left over
from the early days of the building of
the solar system. They live mostly
between Mars and Jupiter. So Mars orbits
at 1.6 6 AU an astronomical unit the
Earth's sun distance. So the Earth is
150 million kilometers from the Sun.
Mars 1.6 times greater all the way out
to Jupiter at five astronomical units.
And the main body of the asteroid belt
is at 2.8 AU.
But there are many objects that have
been scattered away from those more
regularized orbits into highly
elliptical paths that perhaps go out
into the asteroid belt region and then
dive back in towards the inner part of
the solar system. And some of them are
NEO, near-Earth objects that come close
to the Earth. Some even potentially
hazardous objects, PHOs.
These are obviously of interest from the
point of view of a risk of impact but
also often for the chemistry that they
reveal about the early stages of the
formation of the solar system. These
objects have never been subject to
alteration and uh contain the seeds and
the chemistry perhaps even of
life. So these near-earth objects you
can further subdivide them into four
groups. the Amor that orbit exterior to
the Earth's orbit but within the orbit
of Mars. So never making it all the way
out to the asteroid belt. These have
been perhaps deflected and captured into
even shorter orbits. Shorter still the
Apollo which cross from outside the
Earth's orbit to just within it.
The atens whose semi- major axis the
long axis of their elliptical orbit is
actually shorter than that of the earth
but nevertheless they just intersect
with its trajectory around the sun and
the airaas that are entirely within the
earth's orbit so even tighter in towards
the sun but still come relatively close
to us and obviously it's the uh risk of
collision mostly from the Apollo and the
atens
So apous is an aten semi- major axis
slightly less than that of the earth
dives into 74 astronomical units pretty
close to Venus and out to 1.1 just
beyond that of the earth crossing our
path twice in its orbit around the
sun. So in 2004 it was realized that it
was coming our way and that in 2029 just
a few years from now will pass close to
the earth. When I say close just 30,000
kilometers so that's actually going to
make it extremely easy to see it
whizzing across the sky and bring it
inside the orbit of some of our
satellites. the Clark belt where the
geostationary satellites orbit around
the Earth taking exactly 24 hours to
complete one lap and so staying directly
above a single point on the Earth's
surface orbit around at about this
distance and so we've got this little
animation here of Apus coming in and
passing by the Clark belt uh potentially
disturbing some of the asteroids uh some
of the satellites rather and uh going on
its
way. Now when it passes by the Earth,
the Earth's gravity will deflect its
path. This would be putting it onto a
new orbit. And you can see that in the
graphic to the right there, the
trajectory is
changed, but it's also in the graph at
the top there shows the pertubation from
the old orbit in red to the new orbit in
green with the orbit of the Earth being
shown in yellow. And there is some doubt
as to exactly how much that will be.
It's a very very sensitive process. When
you come that close to a larger planet,
you will get a kick, but the exact path
just depends on the absolute details of
what's going to happen. And what
scientists were able to calculate was
that this 2029 close approach would
potentially take it through what's
called a gravitational keyhole that
would bring it even closer in 2036. in
fact bringing it to impact the earth on
Easter Sunday the April the 13th
somewhere along the dotted red line
that's the uh path across the earth
where that impact was expected and again
not possible to be any more precise than
somewhere along that
line but that was a pretty scary idea it
set the record for the highest impact
probability level four on what's called
the Torino scale, which is one of those
logarithmic scales. So, if it's below
zero, it's pretty unlikely, but at each
step up, it's 10 times more likely to
create an impact. So, this was uh well
up there with a very high risk
factor. So, what's a POIS like? Well,
it's 450 m along its long axis. The
bottom diagram there shows a radar
interpretation of the shape, showing it
to be longer and thinner. It's, I guess,
what we would call a potato-shaped
asteroid, not large enough to have had
its gravity overcome the strength of the
material and pull itself into an
efficient sphere or close to it, but
quite
elongated. And the estimates of its mass
come out at 60 million tons. That's a
lot of material. And moving at orbital
speed coming to Earth with a thump, that
would be a tremendous impact if it did
occur. The calculations suggest it would
be a thousand megatons equivalent TNT
explosion. Now, the uh most uh powerful
atomic bomb, the Zar
Bomber detonated over the Arctic by the
Soviet Union back in the day was around
50 million tons. So, this would be
massively greater than that. it would be
a hundred times the power of the 1908
Tunguska effect that uh blew up over
Siberia and leveled trees for hundreds
of miles in every direction. So this
would be big, but it's still small in
comparison to the Chickixelug impactor.
100,000 times less energy released than
the one that took out the dinosaurs 66
million years ago. So, an intermediate
but nevertheless quite devastating uh
impact for anyone that happened to be
anywhere near it. Um, it would make a
mess of an entire
continent.
But tracking the object very very
closely and watching its orbit, we've
been able to refine the estimates. So,
in fact, it will not pass through that
gravitational keyhole that would bring
it to Earth in 2036.
And the Goldstone radar images were able
to pin that down initially to give it a
less than a one in a million and then
subsequently a one in a billion chance
of coming our way close enough to impact
us. And there are several other
potential impact dates in the
205060 2070 range of dates where it will
come close to the earth. But on no
occasion in the next 100 years will it
come closer than the planet Venus does
to the Earth already. So these are
nowhere near as close as we had feared
or even as close as the 2029
impact. But eventually it probably will
find its way into an impact. And that
might be with the Earth or it could be
with Venus itself.
In the long run, it's impossible to
entirely predict the orbit of any of the
objects in the solar system and
particularly so with smaller ones. The
smaller an object is, the more the orbit
can get deflected by non-gravitational
effects. And the main one is called the
Yakovski effect. What happens is that
when you have an asteroid that is
rotating, the sunward side gets
heated. Then the asteroid rotates so
that the warm side is now pointing away
from the sun and is able to cool by
infrared
radiation. So what happens is that the
asteroid stops the incoming solar
radiation on one side and the solar
radiation carries momentum. So it's
giving the object a push on that
side away from the sun. And then as the
asteroid rotates, the energy is
reraiiated away from it in a different
direction leading to that momentum
leaving giving a different momentum
vector and it pushes the
object in two different directions. one
from the initial push of the sun and one
as the reaction to the leaving infrared
radiation. And so the overall net vector
is neither aligned with the sun nor at
right angles to it. And uh the thrust
produced can be really quite hard to
predict especially if the asteroid is
irregular in shape and spinning and
tumbling. This can mean that the uh
drift direction is very very hard to get
a handle on. And so the effect is that
the orbit gradually changes due to this.
And of course as the asteroid's orbit
changes the effect changes. So the drift
is itself unpredictable.
So it's quite difficult to work out
where these guys are going to go even if
you have all the best measurements in
the
world. Now the interest in Apus
um continues
but the story initially flips to a
different asteroid called Bennu
discovered in 1999.
It was decided that a spacecraft Osiris
Rex would fly to Bennu and pick up some
samples and return them to the Earth.
And it did so very successfully. There
was initially a problem with the uh
container door for the sample, but they
NASA got over that and were able to fill
the canister with more material than
they were expecting, bring it back and
drop the canister back at the Earth uh
in September of
2023. And the analysis has proved very
very interesting because Bennu is a very
small space rock and is one of those
objects that appears to contain a lot of
the material from the dawn of the solar
system. There was more water than we
were expecting. It appears that many of
the minerals were formed in liquid
water. Um and so it looks like Benu was
split away from a larger body. And the
most recent results show interesting
chemistry, including things like the
nucleotide bases, the AT CG, and even
the U from DNA and
RNA seeming to be present in some of the
chemical soup that was discovered
lurking on
Bennu. But the point really is that
after the canister was dropped back to
earth in 2023, the spacecraft itself was
free to continue on its mission and fly
away from the earth again to rendevu
with another object and the object in
question was a. So Osiris Rex, the
asteroid sample regalith explorer, which
is where the acronym seems to come from,
was re renamed Apous Explorer or Apex.
And Osiris Apex is due to visit Apus and
arrive in
2029, just in time for that close
approach to the Earth. That kind of
makes sense. You might as well wait for
the asteroid to come to you. And when it
does so, it's going to touch down on the
surface and fire its rocket engines in
order to blast some material off the
surface, which it can then study. And
that will reveal further interesting
data about the origin and nature of
Apopus. but it will also see if the
resulting kickback on a pace will
deflect it at all. Um, and that's
interesting from the point of view of
being able to try deflecting this object
should we ever need to do so. And
obviously uh this was considered very
very important until that Goldstone
radar result showed that we're safe for
at least a hundred years. But 100 years
in astronomy, not very
long. All of the interest led to several
other missions to Apopus. European Space
Agency proposed in 2005 a mission called
Donyote to go and meet up with Apoof and
study it. uh that did not get the
go-ahead in the end but was superseded
by another issa mission Ramsis the rapid
Apoof mission for security and
safety and the clue is in the name there
rapid so this was for very rapid
response to the potential threat and the
idea is to launch this in 2028 and it
still seems to be going ahead um with
all dispatch and to meet up with a
Poffus in February of
2029. And the main spacecraft is going
to go and rendevous with the asteroid
and take a couple of those little tiny
cubat
um 6 in x 6 in satellites uh that with
it that it will deploy. And these will
orbit around the uh asteroid and make
measurements. And they're also going to
see if they can uh affect its orbit with
the main spacecraft by just being there.
And the very very slight gravitational
tug that the uh uh effect of the mass of
the spacecraft has is going to be
interpreted and measured as yet another
way of potentially deflecting these
sorts of objects in the future. And
China got in on the act with Tian Wen 2.
This was supposed to launch in 2022 but
didn't and it was moved to
2025 with different goals now. So they
abandoned the idea of going to Apus.
They're going to visit some other
asteroids and investigate those
instead. And you may recall the Dart
mission. The Dart mission was sent to a
dual asteroid uh the main asteroid
Ditimus and its little moon Dorphus in
orbit around each other. And the uh idea
was to actually deflect an asteroid.
They chose to deflect Dorphus, the
smaller uh satellite
object, from one captured orbit of its
parent to a different captured orbit of
its parent. I suspect that meant it was
safe if you just nudge the little uh
orbiting guy that the main body is going
to carry on almost unaffected on its
trajectory and there was no danger of
accidentally sending this thing our way.
So the dart mission was able to ram into
and give a kick to Dorphus and the
impact shifted its orbit and it was more
successful than it was expected to be.
It was over double the
kick seemed to adjust Dimorphos's orbit
by more than double the factor that we
uh expected. So that was good news in
that the asteroid responded better to
the transfer of momentum from the
impactor than we were expecting. Um and
so this is a good dress rehearsal for
when we actually need it. And one day we
will because on the average once every
80,000 years a large object will arrive
and collide with the earth. The Earth
has many craters on it and we've been
discovering more and more and
recognizing them for what they are in
recent years using things like uh Google
Maps and Google Earth and all sorts of
other uh curious methods for spotting
these previously unidentified craters.
And uh obviously a lot of the craters we
can't find because the space rocks land
in the water and the ocean floor doesn't
uh bode well for discovery of craters.
It gets silted up and indeed on in the
long run gets subducted down below the
continents by the process of plate
tectonics and the evidence is rubbed
out. So it's really only the land where
you find craters. And talking of which,
this is Meteor Crater in Arizona where a
large space rock came down and hit the
ground and just missed a visitors center
as you can see at the top there. Except
I'm kidding because of course this came
down 50,000 years ago. Um, so we're
getting round to being due for another
walloping great impact on that 80,000
year average time scale. Of course, it
could be much longer than that or it
could be next week. We just don't know.
So, thanks very much for listening to
this short video about Apous, one of the
most dangerous objects known to man. Um,
but we're safe from it for at least a
hundred years. Thanks very much.